We're talking about the exFat
File system in course 10.
And in this module, module four, we're
going to talk about file creation and
deletion.
Well, when we create a file an exFAT,
what happens is the directory
entry sets are created and we took
a look at those directory entry sets.
In the last module, the bitmap entries for
the allocation clusters are set to one.
The FATs get updated if any of
the files are fragmented and
data gets written into the clusters
that cluster, that data area.
When we delete a file, the directory
entry set flags get set to not in use.
And we did see that in
our last walk through.
The Bitmap entries from the cluster
allocated to the file are set to 0.
So the Bitmap entries get set to 0 and
then the clusters are marked
as available for use.
The FATs may or may not be zeroed out
depending the file directory data,
the data that gets written out in
the cluster heat the actual data
in the file remains unchanged until
it is overwritten by a new file.
So that data stays there.
The point is to the data,
the Bitmap entries go away.
The directory flags get set to Not in Use.
The directories themselves
will not be overwritten unless
a new filed directory enter
occupies that same space.
We're going to do a walkthrough.
We're going to create a file and
we're going to delete a file and we're
going to take a look at Active Disk Editor
and see what happens when we do that.
The items were going to need for
this walkthrough as we're going to need
Active Disk Editor are exFAT virtual
hard drive in Windows File Explorer.
Let's begin our walk through.
First thing we need to do if you're VHD
is not attached, you need to attach it.
You go to Actions, attach VHD navigate out
to where you saved the exFAT VHD.
You'd select it click Open and
then click OK and your VHD will mount.
Once your VHD is mounted, make note of
the drive number and the drive letter,
the volume letter from my and
his f yours will probably be different.
Now let's open Windows file Explorer and
navigate to the exFAT drive.
We can see on there there should be two
files, one called long file name and
one called short file name.
What we're going to do is we're going to
create a file so
you can right click New and
we're just going to do a text document and
we can call this NewDoc_1.
So once you've created it,
let's open it up and put some data on it.
You can write what you would like.
I am just going to
write this is a new
text document that
I have created and
will delete.
And once you've done that, just save it.
Close it and you can go ahead and
minimize File Explorer.
Now we have Active Disk Editor open, we're
going to go ahead and select open disk.
We're going to navigate to volumes.
So across the top toolbar here
we're going to select volumes and
we're going to find our exFAT volume.
And we're going to double click
it when you select it and
click Open and it opens to our
volume boot record in exFAT.
Up here to get on the top toolbar,
we're going to select Browse File Records.
If you don't see your file
record there for your new file,
go ahead and close and
reopen Active Disk Editor.
So close your exFAT volume.
Close Active Disk Editor and just go
ahead and relaunch Active Disk Editor.
Once you have relaunched Active Disk
Editor you should see the file NewDoc.txt.
And we're going to go ahead and
take a look at the file record for
that file and
we see we have our file records.
Go ahead and set your template position.
We have the directory entry record below
that we have our stream extension and
below that we have our file name entry and
we went over these in the last block.
So here's all our information
in our directory entry.
We can see that is the entry
type is a hexidecimal
85 which tells us that
is an allocated file.
We have a second count which tells us we
have two more directory entries besides
this one we're looking at.
So we have two additional entries and
those are the stream and the file name.
We have our checks on for
air checking we have our file attributes
which if we go ahead on the left
hand side expand attributes,
we can see that is an archive attribute.
Remember all these values
are read little indian.
We have our reserve bites and then we're
going to have our created date and time.
Our modified date and time.
Our last access date and time.
Then we're going to have our created
10 millisecond refinement time.
Our last modified 10
millisecond refinement time.
And we have our universal time code
are UTC offset created modified and
last accessed.
Moving down to our stream extension and
set our template position.
An extreme extension,
we have our entry type which tells
us it is allocated because it is C0.
Then we have our secondary flags.
And if we go ahead and
expand that, that's a packed byte.
So we're going to have
to look at the bits.
And it's a three, so
allocation is turned on and
now FAT chain is turned on.
So we do not have a entry
in the FATs which
means this file is not fragmented and
it is allocated.
Then we have our name length,
the number of characters in the file name.
We have a name,
hash we have our valid data
length which is are initialized file size.
Which is 63 bytes are reserved.
Our first cluster number which is
cluster 18 hexidecimal 1 2, decimal 18.
And we have again our file size which
is the actual size of the file and
we can see it's 63 bytes in length
moving down or a file name entry.
Go ahead and
set your temple position again we have we
can see our file type describes
as hexidecimal C1 and
we know that it's allocated
by that it's in use reserved.
And then we have our file name.
And we can see the file name and
ask it's off to the right NewText_1.txt.
So let's go ahead and
we're going to close this and
we're going to go ahead and
close Active Disk Editor.
We're gonnna bring up our File Explorer.
Now we're going to select NewDoc_1.txt or
whatever you named our new
document that we just created.
We're going to hold down our
shift key right click and
we're going to delete the file and Windows
is going to ask us if we're sure and
we're going to say Yes and
we no longer see the file there.
Let's go ahead now and launch Active Disk
Editor now that we've deleted our file.
Once Active Disk Editor
open select Open Disk.
We're going to select volumes because
we want to look at the exFAT volume.
We're going to select our exFAT volume and
click Open once our exFAT
volume opens it's going to take
us to the volume boot record.
But we're going to go ahead and
open up Browse File Records and
we look in our file records, we no longer
see the document NewTextFile_1.txt.
So let's go ahead and
take a look at the root directory.
You can scroll down the root directory and
locate some of the unallocated entries.
And you can see them because we're
looking for this hexadecimal 05 and
I locate the directory entry for
new text document down here.
Then we see the 05 entry with
an additional entries of two more entries.
And I see the 40 stream extension and
the 41 file name and
we can see the file name and ask
the NewDoc_1.txt is what I name the file.
Now an Active Disk Editor,
if I set template position it
is not reading this correctly.
It reads the type and the secondary
entry count our check some are hash but
now we have accustomed to find but
we know these are our file times and
they're 4 by 32 bit MSDOS timestamps.
Red little indian should be
are created time modified.
Last access our millisecond time count for
created our millisecond time count for
modified.
And then we have our UTC universal time
code offsets in the 15 minute increments.
And we just have reserved
bites here at the end.
These are three UTC offsets for
created modified less access and
the remainder of the bytes are unused.
Moving down to our stream
extension which is right here.
I'm going to go ahead and
set template position anyway even though
it's not going to read it correctly.
It does tell me the type,
the entry type and
we can see that is
an unallocated stream extension.
I do have my secondary flags here so
I'm able to open them up and
I can see that it is not fragmented.
I can see that I have my
name length name hash,
we need to find the starting cluster for
this file.
And so we'll find the offset to
the starting cluster which we know is 14.
So we will go down one line and over 4 and
this would be my starting cluster and
again this is a 4 byte value,
read little indian.
So when I looked down at my hexa
interpreter I can see my starting
cluster is still cluster 18 and then we
have our data length which is 63 bytes.
So cluster 18,
let's see if the data is still there.
So we're going to navigate out and
we have go to sector but
we want to go to cluster 18.
So I'm going to type in 18 here,
we're going to say okay and
we go out to cluster 18.
We can see that our data is still there.
This is a new text document that we
created and we're going to delete.
So here's our data out on the drive.
So even though I permanently deleted
this file, I use shift delete.
I didn't send it to the recycle bin.
The data remains out on the drive and
its directory entry for
the most part remains intact.
So if we wanted to recover
this file we could and
we're going to talk about
that in the next module.
I just wanted to show you how the data
changes when we delete a file.
What happens to our directory entries?
Also keep in mind that
when we delete a file,
not only do the directory entries change,
but
the Bitmap entries for
the clusters are going to be set to 0.
And if this war fragmented file and
it did have a FAT table entry,
the FATs would be zeroed out.
That directory entry will
remain unchanged until we make
a new file that occupies that
space in the root directory.
So that directory entry will be there
until it is overwritten by a new
file directory entry.
In our next module, we're going to
take a look at exFAT file recovery and
how we would go about
recovering this file.